[DOCS-9921] Add attacker clustering & attacker fingerprint public doc (#27194)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/security/application_security/threats/attacker-fingerprint.md

---
title: Datadog Attacker Fingerprint
aliases:
  - /security/application_security/threats/attacker_fingerprint
disable_toc: false
further_reading:
- link: "/security/application_security/threats/attacker_clustering"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Attacker Clustering"
---

This topic describes a feature called **Datadog Attacker Fingerprint** to identify attackers beyond IP addresses.

## Overview

> Datadog Attacker fingerprints are a threat hunting tool. They are automatically computed and added to your traces on attack or login attempts when Application Security Management (ASM) is enabled on your service.

Reviewer: > are a threat hunting tool.

Are they useful for anything outside of attacker clustering?

My intuitive understanding is no - the data is fragmented across many attributes, and those are not very clear how to use manually.

Unless we can share some use cases that don't involve relying on Attacker Clustering, I'd suggest framing this as a feature mainly intended to power attacker clustering. 

I'd go even further - if they don't have standalone use cases we can demonstrate, I think this content should be on the Attacker Clustering doc page and not separate.

Author: We might be able to use it for blocking or more advanced threat hunting (probably requires good example from @Taiki-San) so I would keep it on it's own page. However it's true that at the moment it's only used for clustering so I'll focus the explanation on that

* hash of the session ID if available

If all of the fields are unavailable, the fragment will be omitted as it will provide no meaningful information.

### Header Identifier

The header identifier fragment provides information about the headers used in the request. This particular fragment uses the following information:
* known headers: Referer, Connection, Accept-Encoding, Content-Encoding, Cache-Control, TE, Accept-Charset, Content-Type, Accept, Accept-Language.
* hash of the user agent
* the number of unknown headers
* hash of the sorted unknown headers. The list of unknown headers excludes all XFF headers, cookies and x-datadog headers.

### Network Identifier

The network identifier fragment provide information about the network part of the request. This fragment uses the following information:
* the number of IPs in the XFF header used by the caller to determine the client’s IP
* the presence or absence of the known XFF headers in the following order: x-forwarded-for, x-real-ip, true-client-ip, x-client-ip, x-forwarded, forwarded-for, x-cluster-client-ip, fastly-client-ip, cf-connecting-ip, cf-connecting-ipv6

## How to use Attacker Fingerprints

> Those fragments can be used as filters on ASM trace explorer, by filtering on the desired fingerprint field, for example: `@appsec.fingerprint.header.common_headers:*`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those fragments can be used as filters on ASM trace explorer, by filtering on the desired fingerprint field, for example: `@appsec.fingerprint.header.common_headers:0110000110` will filter on all requests that have the same common headers (Connection, Accept-Encoding, Content-Type and Accept).
```

Filtering on `*` doesn't really explain how this is useful imho.

From the Header Identifier details above, it is my understanding that `0110000110` would be 4 headers: Connection, Accept-Encoding, Content-Type and Accept.

Is this correct? If so, it can be confusing that these headers don't all show up in the trace. 

So we should specify somewhere that the headers are computed client-side, and not all information is available in the received traces.

> ## Attacker Fingerprint Fragments in details
> 
> ### Endpoint Identifier
> 
> The endpoint identifier fragment provides information about a specific endpoint, as well as the parameters used to call said endpoint. This fragments uses the following information:
> * HTTP method
> * hash of the request URI (excluding any query parameters)
> * hash of the sorted query parameter fields
> * hash of the sorted top-level body fields
> 
> ### Session Identifier
> 
> The session identifier fragment can be used to track users based on their session information and whether they are authenticated or not. This fragment uses the following information:
> * hash of the user ID
> * hash of the sorted cookie fields
> * hash of the cookie values by fields
> * hash of the session ID if available
> 
> If all of the fields are unavailable, the fragment will be omitted as it will provide no meaningful information.
> 
> ### Header Identifier
> 
> The header identifier fragment provides information about the headers used in the request. This particular fragment uses the following information:
> * known headers: Referer, Connection, Accept-Encoding, Content-Encoding, Cache-Control, TE, Accept-Charset, Content-Type, Accept, Accept-Language.
> * hash of the user agent
> * the number of unknown headers
> * hash of the sorted unknown headers. The list of unknown headers excludes all XFF headers, cookies and x-datadog headers.
> 
> 
> ### Network Identifier
> 
> The network identifier fragment provide information about the network part of the request. This fragment uses the following information:
> * the number of IPs in the XFF header used by the caller to determine the client’s IP
> * the presence or absence of the known XFF headers in the following order: x-forwarded-for, x-real-ip, true-client-ip, x-client-ip, x-forwarded, forwarded-for, x-cluster-client-ip, fastly-client-ip, cf-connecting-ip, cf-connecting-ipv6
> 
> 
> ## How to use Attacker Fingerprints
> 
> Those fragments can be used as filters on ASM trace explorer, by filtering on the desired fingerprint field, for example: `@appsec.fingerprint.header.common_headers:0110000110` will filter on all requests that have the same common headers (Connection, Accept-Encoding, Content-Type and Accept).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Attacker Fingerprint fragment details

### Endpoint identifier

The endpoint identifier fragment provides information about a specific endpoint, as well as the parameters used to call it. This fragments uses the following information:
* HTTP method
* Hash of the request URI (excluding any query parameters)
* Hash of the sorted query parameter fields
* Hash of the sorted top-level body fields

### Session identifier

The session identifier fragment tracks users based on their session information and whether they are authenticated. This fragment uses the following information:
* Hash of the user ID
* Hash of the sorted cookie fields
* Hash of the cookie values by fields
* Hash of the session ID if available

If all of the fields are unavailable, the fragment is omitted as it does not provide meaningful information.

### Header identifier

The header identifier fragment provides information about the headers used in the request. This particular fragment uses the following information:
* Known headers: Referer, Connection, Accept-Encoding, Content-Encoding, Cache-Control, TE, Accept-Charset, Content-Type, Accept, Accept-Language.
* Hash of the user agent
* The number of unknown headers
* Hash of the sorted unknown headers. The list of unknown headers excludes all XFF headers, cookies and x-datadog headers.

### Network identifier

The network identifier fragment provides information about the network part of the request. This fragment uses the following information:
* The number of IPs in the XFF header used by the caller to determine the client’s IP.
* The presence or absence of the known XFF headers in the following order: x-forwarded-for, x-real-ip, true-client-ip, x-client-ip, x-forwarded, forwarded-for, x-cluster-client-ip, fastly-client-ip, cf-connecting-ip, cf-connecting-ipv6.

## How to use Attacker Fingerprints

Fragments can be used as filters in the ASM Traces explorer by filtering on the desired fingerprint field. For example: `@appsec.fingerprint.header.common_headers:0110000110` will filter on all requests that have the same common headers (Connection, Accept-Encoding, Content-Type and Accept).
```

{{< img src="security/application_security/threats/attacker-fingerprint-trace.png" alt="Screenshot of an ASM trace with attacker fingerprint in the trace side panel"  >}}

> Attacker fingerprints are also used for [Attacker Clustering][1]. If a significant portion of your traffic presents the same fingerprint attributes, attacker clustering will show it has a common attribute of the attack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attacker fingerprints are used in the [Attacker Clustering][1] feature. If a significant portion of your traffic presents the same fingerprint attributes, attacker clustering will show it has a common attribute of the attack.
```

The `also used` is tricky cause i'm not sure how useful they are outside of this single use case.

> Attacker fingerprints are used in the [Attacker Clustering][1] feature. If a significant portion of your traffic presents the same fingerprint attributes, attacker clustering will show it has a common attribute of the attack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Attacker fingerprints are used in the [Attacker Clustering][1] feature. If a significant portion of your traffic presents the same fingerprint attributes, attacker clustering will show it has a common attack attribute.
```

> ## Further Reading

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Further reading
```
